# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-18 19:48:26
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

The Axiom of Choice, Cardinal
Numbers, etc.

This chapter includes Section 0.7 to 0.8 of the original book.

Axiom **3.0.1** (Axiom of Choice). The product of a family of nonempty sets indexed by
a nonempty set is nonempty.

Note 5 — Here's the alternate version: Let $S$ be a set. A *choice function* for $S$ is
a function $f$ from the set of all nonempty subsets of $S$ to $S$ such that $f(A) \in A$ for
all $A \neq \emptyset$, $A \subset S$. The Axiom of Choice is equivalent to the claim: Every set $S$ has
a choice function.

**Definition 3.0.2.** A *partially ordered set* is a nonempty set *A* together with a relation *R*
on *A* × *A* (called a *partial ordering*) of *A* which is reflexive, transitive and **anitsymmetric**.
Antisymmetry means that if (*a*, *b*), (*b*, *a*) ∈ *R* then *a* = *b*. For partial ordering *R*, when
(*a*, *b*) ∈ *R* we denote this as *a* ≤ *b*. Elements *a*, *b* ∈ *A* are *comparable* if either *a* ≤ *b* or
*b* ≤ *a*. A *partial ordering* of a set *A* such that any two elements are *comparable* is called
a *total ordering* (or *linear* or *simple ordering*).

Example 3.0.3

Let A be the power set of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and define C ≤ D if C ⊆ D. This is a partial ordering, but not a total ordering. For example, {1, 2} and {2, 3} are not comparable.

Let (A, ≤) be a partially ordered set. An element a ∈ A is maximal in A if for every
c ∈ A which is comparable to a, we have c ≤ a. An upper bound of a nonempty subset B
of A is an element d ∈ A such that b ≤ d for every b ∈ B. A nonempty subset B of A
that is totally ordered by ≤ is a chain in A.

Theorem 3.0.4 (Zorn's lemma)

Let A be a nonempty partially ordered set. If every chain has an upper bound, then
A has a local maximum.

**Definition 3.0.5.** Let _B_ be a nonempty subset of a partially ordered set _A_ (under ≤).
If every nonempty subset of _A_ has a least element¹, then _A_ is _well ordered_.

Proposition 3.0.6 (The Well Ordering Principle) If A is a nonempty set, then there
exists a total ordering $\leq$ of A such that A is well ordered under $\leq$.

This allows us to extend the Principle of Mathematical Induction (2.0.10) to any well
ordered set.

---

## 第 2 页

Definition 3.0.7. • Two sets A and B are equipollent if there exists a bijective map
from A to B, in which case we denote this as A ~ B.

* If set A is equipollent to a set I_n = {1,2,...,n} for some n ∈ N or to the set I_0 = ∅
  then set A is *finite*. Otherwise set A is *infinite*.

**Definition 3.0.8.** *The cardinal number* of a set A, denoted |A|, is the equivalence class
of A under the equivalence relation of equipollence. |A| is an infinite or finite cardinal
according as to whether A is an infinite or finite set.

Let A and B be disjoint sets such that |A| = ℵ and |B| = β. The sum α + β is the
cardinal number |A ∪ B|. The _product_ αβ is the cardinal number |A × B|

Theorem 3.0.9

If A is a set and P(A) is its power set, then |A| < |P(A)|.

Proof. The assignment $a \mapsto \{a\}$ defines an injective map $A \rightarrow P(A)$ so that $|A| \leq |P(A)|$.
If there were a bijective map $f : A \rightarrow P(A)$, then for some $a_0 \in A, f(a_0) = B$, where
$B = \{a \in A \mid a \notin f(a)\} \subset A$. But this yields a contradiction: $a_0 \in B$ and $a_0 \notin B$.
Therefore $|A| \neq |P(A)|$ and hence $|A| < |P(A)|$. ∎

*Because the mouse is broken , next we'll only list the theorems.

Theorem 3.0.10

If A and B are sets such that |A| ≤ |B| and |B| ≤ |A| , then |A| = |B| .

Theorem 3.0.11

The class of all cardinal numbers is linearly ordered by ≤. If α and β are cardinal numbers, then exactly on of the following is true:

Note 6 — This is called the *Law of Trichotomy*. A family of functions partially
ordered as in the proof of 3.0.11 is said to be ordered by extension.

Theorem 3.0.12

Every infinite set has a denumerable subset. In particular, N₀ ≤ α for every infinite
cardinal number α.

Lemma 3.0.13

If A is an infinite set and F is a finite set then |A ∪ F| = |A| . In particular, α + n = α
for every infinite cardinal number α and every finite cardinal number n.

---

## 第 3 页

Theorem 3.0.14

If α and β are cardinal numbers such that β ≤ α and α is infinite, then α + β = α

Theorem 3.0.15

If α and β are cardinal numbers such that 0 ≠ β ≤ α and α is infinite, then αβ = α
; in particular, αℵ₀ = α and if B is finite then ℵ₀β = ℵ₀.

Theorem 3.0.16

Let A be a set and for each integer n ≥ 1 let Aⁿ = A × A × ... × A (n factors).

Corollary 3.0.17 If A is an infinite set and F(A) is the set of all finite subsets of A,
then |F(A)| = |A|.

---

