# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 15:00:44
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

PROPERTIES OF THE INTEGERS

(1) (Well Ordering of Z) If A is any nonempty subset of Z+, there is some element m ∈ A such that m ≤ a, for all a ∈ A (m is called a minimal element of A).

(2) If a, b ∈ Z with a ≠ 0, we say a divides b if there is an element c ∈ Z such that b = ac. In this case we write a | b; if a does not divide b we write a <binary data, 1 bytes> b.

(3) If a, b ∈ Z - {0}, there is a unique positive integer d, called the greatest common divisor of a and b (or g.c.d. of a and b), satisfying:

The g.c.d. of a and b will be denoted by (a,b). If (a,b)=1, we say that a and b are relatively prime.

(4) If a, b ∈ Z - {0}, there is a unique positive integer l, called the least common multiple of a and b (or l.c.m. of a and b), satisfying:

The connection between the greatest common divisor d and the least common multiple l of two integers a and b is given by dl = ab.

(5) The Division Algorithm: if a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then there exist unique q, r ∈ Z such that

where q is the quotient and r the remainder. This is the usual "long division" familiar from elementary arithmetic.

(6) The Euclidean Algorithm is an important procedure which produces a greatest common divisor of two integers a and b by iterating the Division Algorithm: if a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then we obtain a sequence of quotients and remainders

where $r_n$ is the last nonzero remainder. Such an $r_n$ exists since $|b| > |r_0| > |r_1| > \dots > |r_n|$ is a decreasing sequence of strictly positive integers if the remainders are nonzero and such a sequence cannot continue indefinitely. Then $r_n$ is the g.c.d. $(a, b)$ of $a$ and $b$.

---

## 第 2 页

Example

Suppose $a = 57970$ and $b = 10353$. Then applying the Euclidean Algorithm we obtain:

(7) One consequence of the Euclidean Algorithm which we shall use regularly is the following: if a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then there exist x, y ∈ Z such that

that is, the g.c.d. of a and b is a Z-linear combination of a and b. This follows by recursively writing the element r_n in the Euclidean Algorithm in terms of the previous remainders (namely, use equation (n) above to solve for r_n = r_{n-2} - q_n r_{n-1} in terms of the remainders r_{n-1} and r_{n-2}, then use equation (n-1) to write r_n in terms of the remainders r_{n-2} and r_{n-3}, etc., eventually writing r_n in terms of a and b).

(8) An element p of Z+ is called a prime if p > 1 and the only positive divisors of p are 1 and p (initially, the word prime will refer only to positive integers). An integer n > 1 which is not prime is called composite. For example, 2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,... are primes and 4,6,8,9,10,12,14,15,16,18,... are composite.

An important property of primes (which in fact can be used to define the primes (cf. Exercise 3)) is the following: if p is a prime and p | ab, for some a, b ∈ Z, then either p | a or p | b.

(9) The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic says: if n ∈ Z, n > 1, then n can be factored uniquely into the product of primes, i.e., there are distinct primes p1, p2,..., ps and positive integers α1, α2,..., αs such that

This factorization is unique in the sense that if $q_1, q_2, \dots, q_t$ are any distinct primes and $\beta_1, \beta_2, \dots, \beta_t$ positive integers such that

then s = t and if we arrange the two sets of primes in increasing order, then qᵢ = pᵢ and αᵢ = βᵢ, 1 ≤ i ≤ s. For example, n = 1852423848 = 2³3²11²19³31 and this decomposition into the product of primes is unique.

Suppose the positive integers a and b are expressed as products of prime powers:

---

## 第 3 页

where $p_1, p_2, \dots, p_s$ are distinct and the exponents are $\ge 0$ (we allow the exponents to be 0 here so that the products are taken over the same set of primes — the exponent will be 0 if that prime is not actually a divisor). Then the greatest common divisor of $a$ and $b$ is

(10) The Euler φ-function is defined as follows: for n ∈ Z⁺ let φ(n) be the number of positive integers a ≤ n with a relatively prime to n, i.e., (a, n) = 1. For example, φ(12) = 4 since 1, 5, 7 and 11 are the only positive integers less than or equal to 12 which have no factors in common with 12. Similarly, φ(1) = 1, φ(2) = 1, φ(3) = 2, φ(4) = 2, φ(5) = 4, φ(6) = 2, etc. For primes p, φ(p) = p − 1, and, more generally, for all a ≥ 1 we have the formula

The function φ is multiplicative in the sense that

(note that it is important here that a and b be relatively prime). Together with the formula above this gives a general formula for the values of $\varphi$: if $n = p_1^{\alpha_1} p_2^{\alpha_2} \dots p_s^{\alpha_s}$, then

For example, $\varphi(12) = \varphi(2^2)\varphi(3) = 2^1(2-1)3^0(3-1) = 4$. The reader should note that we shall use the letter $\varphi$ for many different functions throughout the text so when we want this letter to denote Euler's function we shall be careful to indicate this explicitly.

---

