# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-18 22:58:54
> 总页数: 4
> 处理页数: 4

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.03.19

A Review at Calculus
Having defined real numbers (may mention in the following notes), the first thing we will study is sequences. We will want to study what it means for a sequence to converge. Intuitively, we would like to say that 1, converges to 0, while 1, 2, 3, 4, ... diverges. However, the actual formal definition of convergence is rather hard to get right, and historically there have been failed attempts that produced spurious results.

Definition Sequence
A sequence is, formally, a function α: N → R (or C). Usually (i.e. always), we write aₙ instead of α(n). Instead of α, we usually write it as (aₙ), (aₙ)₁∞ or (aₙ)ₙ=₁∞ to indicate it is a sequence.

Definition Limits of sequence
Let (aₙ) be a sequence and l ∈ R. Then aₙ converges to l, tends to l, or aₙ → l, if for all ε > 0, there is some N ∈ N such that whenever n > N, we have |aₙ - l| < ε. In symbols, this says

(∀ε > 0)(∃N)(∀n ≥ N) |aₙ - l| < ε

We say l is the limit of (aₙ).

Let's take a look at an example from Demidovich. Suppose xₙ = n/(n+1) (n ∈ N), prove that lim xₙ = 1.

Proof: That is, proof that for any given ε > 0, find out the N = N(ε) that when n > N, we have |xₙ - 1| < ε

Since |xₙ - 1| = 1/(n+1), we only need to let 1/(n+1) < ε, i.e. n > 1/ε - 1. So let N = N(ε) = [1/ε - 1].

Definition Limit of function
Let A ⊆ R and let f: A → R. We say

lim f(x) = l,
x→a

or f(x) → l as x → a, if

(∀ε > 0)(∃δ > 0)(∀x ∈ A) 0 < |x - a| < δ ⇒ |f(x) - l| < ε. (1)

We couldn't care less what happens when x = a, hence the strict inequality 0 < |x - a|. In fact, f doesn't even have to be defined at x = a.

---

## 第 2 页

Definition Derivative of function
The derivative of a function f(x) with respect to x, interpreted as the rate of change of f(x) with x, is

df/dx = lim(h->0) (f(x+h) - f(x))/h

A function f(x) is differentiable at x if the limit exists (i.e. the left-hand and right-hand limits are equal).
Definition O and o notations
(i) "f(x) = o(g(x)) as x -> x0" if lim(x->x0) f(x)/g(x) = 0. Intuitively, f(x) is much smaller than g(x).
(ii) "f(x) = O(g(x)) as x -> x0" if f(x)/g(x) is bounded as x -> x0. Intuitively, f(x) is about as big as g(x).

Note that for f(x) = O(g(x)) to be true, lim(x->x0) f(x)/g(x) need not exist.
Usually, x0 is either 0 or infinity. Clearly, we have f(x) = o(g(x)) implies f(x) = O(g(x)).

Theorem 1 (Chain rule)
Given f(x) = F(g(x)), then

df/dx = (dF/dg) * (dg/dx)

Theorem 2 (Product rule)
Give f(x) = u(x)v(x). Then

f'(x) = u'(x)v(x) + u(x)v'(x)

Theorem 3 (Quotient rule)
Give f(x) = u(x)/v(x), then

f'(x) = (u'v - uv')/v^2

Theorem 4 (Leibniz's rule)
Given f = uv, then

---

## 第 3 页

f^(n)(x) = Σ (n choose r) f^(r)(x)g^(n-r)
where f^(n) is the n-th derivative of f.

Definition Integration
An integral is the limit of a sum, e.g.

∫_a^b f(x) dx = lim_(Δx→0) Σ_(i=1)^N f(x_i) Δx

For example, we can take Δx = (b-a)/N and x_n = a + n Δx. Note that an integral need not be defined with this particular Δx and x_n. The term "integral" simply refers to any limit of a sum (The usual integrals we use are a special kind known as Riemann integral, which we will study formally in analysis). Pictorially, we have

The area under the graph from x_n to x_(n+1) is f(x_n)Δx + O(Δx^2). Provided that f is differentiable, the total area under the graph from a to b is

lim_(N→∞) Σ_(i=1)^N f(x_i)Δx + N⋅O(Δx^2) = lim_(N→∞) Σ_(i=1)^N f(x_i)Δx + O(Δx) = ∫_a^b f(x) dx

Theorem 5 (Fundamental Theorem of Calculus)
Let F(x) = ∫_a^x f(t) dt. Then F'(x) = f(x)
Proof:

---

## 第 4 页

d
dx
F(x) = lim 1/h [∫(x to x+h) f(t) dt - ∫(a to x) f(t) dt]
= lim 1/h ∫(x to x+h) f(t) dt
= lim 1/h [f(x)h - O(h²)]
= f(x)

OK. That's all for today.

---

