# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-18 22:59:23
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.03.20

A Review of Calculus (continue)

First of all, let's review the end of the mean value theorem.

One corollary of the work in the previous section is Rolle's theorem.

Theorem 28.4.1 (Rolle's theorem)
Suppose f: [a, b] → R is a continuous function, which is differentiable on the open interval (a, b), such that f(a) = f(b). Then there is a point c∈ (a, b) such that f'(c) = 0.

Obviously. Then one can adapt the theorem as follows.

Theorem 28.4.2 (Mean value theorem)
Suppose f: [a, b] → R is a continuous function, which is differentiable on the open interval (a, b). Then there is a point c∈ (a, b) such that
f'(c) = (f(b)-f(a))/(b-a).

---

## 第 2 页

y
Slope  f(b)-f(a)
b-a
(b, f(b))
(a, f(a))
a
(c, f(c))
b
x
A triaval fact is that the distance from point (c, f(c)) to line AB is the longest of all the points under the straight line AB (in the case of the above figure)

Theorem 28.4.5 (Ratio mean value theorem)
Let f,g: [a,b]→ R be two continuous functions which are differentiable on (a, b), and such that g(a) ≠ g(b). Then there exists c∈ (a, b) such that
f'(c)(g(b) - g(a)) = g'(c)(f(b) - f(a))

Also called Cauchy's mean value theorem.
Here we are as an insignificant supplement. Suppose f is a real-valued function defined in a neighborhood of point a∈ R. Intuitively speaking, f is continuous at a means that lim f(x) exists and equal to f(a). It is obvious that a function is derivable at a certain point then it is continuous at this point, but the reverse is not always true. But something that might be counter-intuitive. Functions that are differentiable everywhere are continuous, but functions that are not differentiable anywhere can be continuous as well. (The word differentiable and derivable mean the same thing now, but not always.) Here it is Weierstrass function.

---

## 第 3 页

Weierstrass cosine function:

Wλ,b(x) = Σ λⁿ cos(2πbⁿx)
n=0

The rough shape of the graph is determined by the n = 0 term in the series: cos(πx). The higher-order terms create the smaller oscillations. With b carefully chosen as in the theorem, the graph becomes so jagged that there is no reasonable choice for a tangent line at any point; that is, the function is nowhere differentiable. So much for today's notes. Time for bed.

---

