# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 09:07:59
> 总页数: 4
> 处理页数: 4

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.12.22
§7.2 Re-definitions
Now that we've defined a topological space, for nearly all of our metric notions we can
write down as the definition the one that required only open sets (which will of course
agree with our old definitions when we have a metric space).
§7.2.i Continuity
Here was our motivating example, continuity:
Definition 7.2.1. We say function f: X → Y of topological spaces is continuous at a
point p∈ X if the pre-image of any open neighborhood of f(p) is an open neighborhood
of p. The function is continuous if it is continuous at every point.
Thus homeomorphisms carries over: a bijection which is continuous in both directions.
Definition 7.2.2. A homeomorphism of topological spaces (X, TX) and (Y, тү) is a
bijection f: X → Y which induces a bijection from Tx to Ty: i.e. the bijection preserves
open sets.
Definition 7.2.4. In a general topological space X, we say that SCX is closed in X
if the complement XS is open in X.
If SCX is any set, the closure of S, denoted S, is defined as the smallest closed set
containing S.
Not everything works:
Remark 7.2.7 (Complete and (totally) bounded are metric properties) The two met-
ric properties we have seen, "complete" and "(totally) bounded", are not topological
properties. They rely on a metric, so as written we cannot apply them to topological
spaces. One might hope that maybe, there is some alternate definition (like we saw
for "continuous function") that is just open-set based. But Example 6.3.1 showing
(0,1) R tells us that it is hopeless.
Remark 7.2.8 (Sequences don't work well)
You could also try to port over the
notion of sequences and convergent sequences. However, this turns out to break a
lot of desirable properties. Therefore I won't bother to do so, and thus if we are
discussing sequences you should assume that we are working with a metric space.
As you might have guessed, there exist topological spaces which cannot be realized
as metric spaces (in other words, are not metrizable). One example is just to take
X = {a,b,c} and the topology Tx = {Ø, {a,b,c}}. This topology is fairly "stupid": it
can't tell apart any of the points a, b, c! But any metric space can tell its points apart
(because d(x, y) > 0 when x ≠ y).

---

## 第 2 页

We'll see less trivial examples later, but for now we want to add a little more sanity condition onto our spaces. There is a whole hierarchy of such axioms, labelled Tn for integers n (with n = 0 being the weakest and n = 6 the strongest); these axioms are called separation axioms.
By far the most common hypothesis is the T₂ axiom, which bears a special name.

Definition 7.3.1. A topological space X is Hausdorff if for any two distinct points p and q in X, there exists an open neighborhood U of p and an open neighborhood V of q such that
U ∩ V = Ø.

In other words, around any two distinct points we should be able to draw disjoint open neighborhoods. Here's a picture to go with above, but not much going on.

Question 7.3.2. Show that all metric spaces are Hausdorff.

I just want to define this here so that I can use this word later. In any case, basically any space we will encounter other than the Zariski topology is Hausdorff.

Q7-3-2. (The question isn't very rigorous Say "topology induced by metric space is better.)
证明。(我以为我想得太简单了沒想到就那么简单。)
Let D= d(p,q) and B(p) & B(q) satisfy.

§7.4 Subspaces

Prototypical example for this section: S¹ is a subspace of R².

One can also take subspaces of general topological spaces.

Definition 7.4.1. Given a topological space X, and a subset S ⊆ X, we can make S into a topological space by declaring that the open subsets of S are U ∩ S for open U ⊆ X. This is called the subspace topology.

So for example, if we view S¹ as a subspace of R², then any open arc is an open set, because you can view it as the intersection of an open disk with S¹.

---

## 第 3 页

§7.5 Connected spaces

Prototypical example for this section: [0,1] ∪ [2,3] is disconnected.

Even in metric spaces, it is possible for a set to be both open and closed.

Definition 7.5.1. A subset S of a topological space X is clopen if it is both closed and open in X. (Equivalently, both S and its complement are open.)

For example Ø and the entire space are examples of clopen sets. In fact, the presence of a nontrivial clopen set other than these two leads to a so-called disconnected space.

Question 7.5.2. Show that a space X has a nontrivial clopen set (one other than Ø and X) if and only if X can be written as a disjoint union of two nonempty open sets.

证明: (⇐) Suppose X = A ∪ B, A, B ≠ Ø and both open. Then A, B is both clopen.
(⇒) Suppose A is that nontrivial clopen set. The X-A is open and A ∩ (X-A) = Ø

We say X is disconnected if there are nontrivial clopen sets, and connected otherwise. To see why this should be a reasonable definition, it might help to solve Problem 7A.

Example 7.5.3 (Disconnected and connected spaces)
(a) The metric space
{(x, y) | x² + y² ≤ 1} ∪ {(x, y) | (x-4)² + y² ≤ 1} ⊆ R²
is disconnected (it consists of two disks).

(b) The space [0, 1] ∪ [2, 3] is disconnected: it consists of two segments, each of which is a clopen set.

(c) A discrete space on more than one point is disconnected, since every set is clopen in the discrete space.

(d) Convince yourself that the set
{x ∈ Q: x² < 2014}
is a clopen subset of Q. Hence Q is disconnected too - it has gaps.

(e) [0, 1] is connected.

§7.6 Path-connected spaces

Prototypical example for this section: Walking around in C.

A stronger and perhaps more intuitive notion of a connected space is a path-connected space. The short description: "walk around in the space".

---

## 第 4 页

Definition 7.6.1. A path in the space X is a continuous function
γ: [0,1] → Χ.

Its endpoints are the two points γ(0) and γ(1).

You can think of [0, 1] as measuring "time", and so we'll often write γ(t) for t ∈ [0, 1]
(with t standing for "time"). Here's a picture of a path.
好,马上就可以接上HOTT了。(唔,看来得明天了。)

Definition 7.6.3. A space X is path-connected if any two points in it are connected
by some path.

Exercise 7.6.4 (Path-connected implies connected). Let X = U ⊔ V be a disconnected
space. Show that there is no path from a point of U to point V. (If γ: [0,1] → X, then we
get [0,1]=γpre (U) ⊔ γpre (V), but [0, 1] is connected.)

Example 7.6.5 (Examples of path-connected spaces)
• R² is path-connected, since we can "connect" any two points with a straight
line.
• The unit circle S¹ is path-connected, since we can just draw the major or
minor arc to connect two points.

---

