# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-18 23:16:57
> 总页数: 10
> 处理页数: 10

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.07.23
今天学点 roots of unity、理论上这是7.23的笔记但实际上开始鸟的时候已经7.27了。
Brilli the ant stands on vertex 1 of the regular decagon below.

• He starts by hopping 1 space at a time (from 1 to 2, then from 2 to 3, and so on). He performs 10 hops in this way.
• He then hops 2 spaces at a time (from 1 to 3, then from 3 to 5, and so on). He performs 10 hops in this way.
• He continues to increase the hop distance every 10 hops: hopping 3 spaces 10 times, then hopping 4 spaces 10 times, and so on.
• After Brilli has hopped 10 spaces 10 times, he ends his workout.

When Brilli has completed his workout, which vertex will he be standing on?
Answer = 1 Obviously.

DEFINITION
For any positive integer n, the nth roots of unity are the complex solutions to the equation xⁿ = 1, and there are n solutions to the equation.

(这是不是群论里的 order. 很好奇有多少结论能推广到群论)

---

## 第 2 页

THEOREM
If n is even, there will be 2 real solutions to the equation xⁿ = 1, which are 1 and -1; if n is odd, there will be 1 real solution, which is 1.

TRY IT YOURSELF

( (-1 + i√3) / 2 )³ = ?

解：cos(2π/3) = -1/2, sin(2π/3) = √3/2, ∴ 原式 = (cos(2π/3) + isin(2π/3))³ = e²πi = 1

THEOREM
Let n be a positive integer and Uₙ be the set of all nᵗʰ roots of unity. Then

Uₙ = {e²ᵏπi/ⁿ | k ∈ {1, 2, ..., n}}.

The 4ᵗʰ roots of unity

The 5ᵗʰ roots of unity

---

## 第 3 页

MATHEMATICS

How to prove that x^(2n) + x^n + 1 has a factor x² + x + 1 if and only if n ≠ 0 mod 3?

Well, I don't know whether it is exactly correct. I get this result when I was dealing with a simple problem "find out the factors of x^10 + x^5 + 1". I put different n into this polynomial and draw the roots in the complex plane by WolframAlpha: n=4,7,9

The distribution of these roots has certain rules: the red angle is half of the blue one, and one red angle comes after one blue angle and make up the whole circle in this way. By observing the pictures, we can easily get the result that is stated in the question.

The following question has been moved to another post: How to prove that ∑(k, i=0) x^(in) have a same factor P(x) if and only if n ≠ 0 mod (k+1)?

[Also, for x^(3n) + x^(2n) + x^n + 1, I infer it has a factor x² + 1 if and only if n ≠ 0 mod 4. Also see the pictures: n=2,3,4,5

My guess is: For polynomials x^(kn) + x^((k-1)n) + ... + x^(2n) + x^n, if n ≠ 0 mod (k + 1), +1, k ≥ 2 they all have a certain factor P(x).

Is that true? How do I find the factor P(x)? How to prove? (I think the method of Cotes' Theorem may be used for it. See T. Needham, Visual Complex Analysis, pp 46-47)]

Welcome to MSE. A question should be written in such a way that it can be understood even by someone who did not read its title. - José Carlos Santos

What is your question: That in the title or in your guess? - Paul Frost

Please do not ask multiple questions in one post. Here you are asking two questions:(1) about x^(2n) + x^n + 1 and (2) about ∑(k, i=0) x^(in). Please make a separate question for one of these and keep the other question in this post. - insipidintegrator

@insinidintegrator ok i'll do it - Дъартский

---

## 第 4 页

Notice that x² + x + 1 = (x³-1)/(x-1), so working mod x² + x + 1 you can reduce all the exponents mod 3.

Because (-1 ± √-3)/2 are roots of x² + x + 1 it is equivalent to prove that ((-1 ± √-3)/2)^(2n) + ((-1 ± √-3)/2)^n + 1 = 0 for the proposed values of n. In other words that ((-1 + √-3)/2)^n = ((-1 - √-3)/2)^n.

We are done.

Have you learnt about cube roots of unity yet?

Since (x² + x + 1)(x - 1) = x³ - 1 the roots of (x² + x + 1) are {ζ, ζ²} where ζ is a primitive cubic root of 1.

When n ≠ 0 mod 3 there is an equality of sets {ζⁿ, ζ²ⁿ} = {ζ, ζ²} which shows that ζ and ζ² are also roots of x²ⁿ + xⁿ + 1, thus the divisibility of polynomials.

On the other hand when n ≡ 0 mod 3 we have ζⁿ = ζ²ⁿ = 1 so {ζ, ζ²} are not roots of x²ⁿ + xⁿ + 1.

This proof is nice, it seems that it isn't too much more to prove a more general statement this way for all cyclotomic polynomials that Φₖ(xⁿ) is divisible by Φₖ(x) iff gcd(k, n) = 1, since otherwise we don't have a bijection of the set of roots.

We can also see this in terms of the factorizations themselves. The "template" would be (u² + u + 1) = (u³ - 1)/(u - 1), u ≠ 1. As "base" examples, we have

---

## 第 5 页

n = 2: x⁴ + x² + 1
= (x²)³ - 1 / x² - 1 = (x³)² - 1 / x² - 1
= (x³ - 1) * (x³ + 1) / (x - 1) * (x + 1)
= (x² + x + 1)
* (x² - x + 1), x² ≠ 1;

n = 4: x⁸ + x⁴ + 1
= (x⁴)³ - 1 / x⁴ - 1 = (x³)⁴ - 1 / x⁴ - 1
= ([x³]² - 1) * ([x³]² + 1) / (x² - 1) * (x² + 1)
= ([x³]² - 1) * ([x²]³ + 1) / (x - 1) * (x + 1) * (x² + 1)
= (x³ - 1) * (x³ + 1) * ([x²]³ + 1) / (x - 1) * (x + 1) * (x² + 1)
= (x² + x + 1)
* (x² - x + 1)
* (x⁴ - x² + 1), x⁴ ≠ 1;

for these polynomials, we are able to write the numerator in each quotient as a "difference of two squares", however,

n = 3: x⁶ + x³ + 1
= (x³)³ - 1 / x³ - 1, x³ ≠ 1,
= (x³ - 1) * (x⁶ + x³ + 1) / (x³ - 1)

since we are unable to use a "difference of two squares"; it is easily checked that this polynomial is irreducible over ℝ.

For the general cases, we actually need to consider the parity of n.

n = 3m ± 1 = 2p, 2p':
x⁴ᵖ + x²ᵖ + 1
= (x²ᵖ)³ - 1 / x²ᵖ - 1 = (x³ᵖ)² - 1 / x²ᵖ - 1

---

## 第 6 页

=  (x^(3p) - 1) * (x^(3p) + 1) / (x^p - 1) * (x^p + 1)
= ((x^3)^p - 1) * (x^(3p) + 1) / (x^p - 1) * (x^p + 1)

= (x^3 - 1) / (x - 1)
* ([x^3]^(p-1) + [x^3]^(p-2) + ... + x^3 + 1) / (x^(3p) + 1)
* (x^(p-1) + x^(p-2) + ... + x + 1) / (x^p + 1)

= (x^2 + x + 1)
* ([x^3]^(p-1) + [x^3]^(p-2) + ... + x^3 + 1) / (x^(3p) + 1)
* (x^(p-1) + x^(p-2) + ... + x + 1) / (x^p + 1)

x^(2p) ≠ 1,
and similarly for 2p',

n = 3m [odd] :
x^(6m) + x^(3m) + 1
= (x^(3m))^3 - 1 / x^(3m) - 1
= (x^(3m) - 1) * ([x^(3m)]^2 + x^(3m) + 1) / x^(3m) - 1
= (x^(3m))^2 + x^(3m)
+ 1 = x^(6m) + x^(3m) + 1,
x^(3m) ≠ 1,
which simply returns our polynomial, which is biquadratic in 3m and irreducible over ℝ;

n = 3m ± 1 [odd] :
x^(2n) + x^n + 1
= x^(3n) - 1 / x^n - 1 = (x^3)^n - 1 / x^n - 1
= (x^3 - 1) / (x - 1)

---

## 第 7 页

(x³)^n-1 + (x³)^n-2 + ... + x³ + 1
/ x^n-1 + x^n-2 + ... + x + 1
= (x² + x + 1)
(x³)^n-1 + (x³)^n-2 + ... + x³ + 1
/ x^n-1 + x^n-2 + ... + x + 1
x^n ≠ 1,

n = 3m = 6q :
x^12q + x^6q + 1
= (x^6q)³ - 1 / x^6q - 1
= (x^6q - 1) * ([x^6q]² + x^6q + 1) / x^6q - 1
= x^12q + x^6q + 1
= (x^6q + x^3q + 1) * (x^6q - x^3q + 1), x^6q ≠ 1,

which returns irreducible biquadratic factors, none of which are x² + x + 1. A couple of examples of this latter case are

n = 5 : x^10 + x^5 + 1
= (x^5)³ - 1 / x^5 - 1 = (x³ - 1) / (x - 1)
= (x³)^5-1 + (x³)^5-2 + ... + x³ + 1 / x^5-1 + x^5-2 + ... + x + 1
= (x² + x + 1) * (x^12 + x^9 + x^6 + x^3 + 1) / (x^4 + x³ + x² + x + 1), x^5 ≠ 1,

n = 6 : x^12 + x^6 + 1
= (x^6 + x³ + 1) * (x^6 - x³ + 1), x^6 ≠ 1.

Viewed in this way, the zeroes of u² + u + 1 are the three unit-modulus zeroes of z³ - 1, z_k = e^(i * 2πk/3), k = 0, 1, 2, with z_0 = 1 "removed". Finding the zeroes of w^(2n) + w^n + 1 substitutes u = w^n, generating three "families" of n-th-roots.

w^n = z_0, which are excluded by the condition z^n ≠ 1;
=> w_(0,j) = e^(i * [0 + 2jπ]/n),
= e^(i * 6jπ/(3n))

---

## 第 8 页

0 ≤ j ≤ n-1,

*   wⁿ = z₁
    ⇒ w₁,j = e^[i·[(2π/3) + 2j]π]/n
    = e^[i·(2+6j)π/(3n)],
    0 ≤ j ≤ n-1;
*   wⁿ = z₂
    ⇒ w₂,j = e^[i·[(4π/3) + 2j]π]/n
    = e^[i·(4+6j)π/(3n)],
    0 ≤ j ≤ n-1.

This produces the 2n complex zeroes expected for the polynomial.

For n = 3m ± 1, it is possible to find integer solutions for j in either
(2 + 6j)·π / 3n = 2π/3, 4π/3 ⇒ j or (4 + 6π)·j / 3n = 2π/3, 4π/3 ⇒ j, so the
= n-1/3, 2n-1/3 = n-2/3, 2n-2/3
0 ≤ j ≤ n-1.

zeroes of z² + z + 1 are found among those of w²ⁿ + wⁿ + 1. But for n = 3m, the zeroes become e^[i·(2+6j)π/(9m)], and e^[i·(4+6j)π/(9m)]

j = 18m-2/6, 36m-2/6, are no longer integers. Hence, the zeroes of z² + z + 1
18m-4/6, 36m-4/6 are not zeroes of w⁶ᵐ + w³ᵐ + 1.

---

## 第 9 页

How to prove that ∑_{i=0}^{k} x^{in} have a same factor P(x) if and only if n ≠ 0 mod (k + 1)?

Please see the pre-content here: How to prove that x^{2n} + x^n + 1 has a factor x² + x + 1 if and only if n ≠ 0 mod 3?

Well, I don't know whether it is exactly correct. I get this result (x^{2n} + x^n + 1 has a factor x² + x + 1 if and only if n ≠ 0 mod 3) when I was dealing with a simple problem "find out the factors of x^{10} + x^5 + 1". I put different n into this polynomial and draw the roots in the complex plane by WolframAlpha: n=4,7,9

The distribution of these roots has certain rules: the red angle is half of the blue one, and one red angle comes after one blue angle and make up the whole circle in this way. By observing the pictures, we can easily get the result that is stated in the question.

Also, for x^{3n} + x^{2n} + x^n + 1, I infer it has a factor x² + 1 if and only if n ≠ 0 mod 4. Also see the pictures: n=2,3,4,5

My guess is: For polynomials x^{kn} + x^{(k-1)n} + ... + x^{2n} + x^n, if + 1, k ≥ 2, n ≠ 0 mod (k+1), they all have a certain factor P(x).

Is that true? How do I find the factor P(x)? How to prove? (I think the method of Cotes' Theorem may be used for it. See T. Needham, Visual Complex Analysis, pp 46-47)

If P_k(x) = P(x) = x^k + x^(k-1) + ... + x² + x + 1, then with Q_{k,n}(x) = Q(x) = x^{kn} + x^{(k-1)n} + ... + x^{2n} + x^n + 1 we have that Q(y) = P(y^n).

---

## 第 10 页

Since the roots of P are precisely the k + 1 roots of unity distinct from 1, so
e^(2πim/(k+1)), m = 1,.. k we get that the roots of Q are precisely

e^(2πir/n) e^(2πim/(n(k+1))), m = 1,.. k, r
= 0,..n-1

Now if (n, k+1) = 1 one can easily see that one can solve in
c=1,.. k, r=0,.. n-1 the equation r(k+1) - cn = m for every m = 1,.. k as
one first solves r(k+1) - cn = 1 with (c, k+1) = 1 and then one gets the solutions
for m = 2,.. k as 2c,... kc (reducing them modulo k + 1) which are none divisible
by k + 1 so are indeed in 1,.. k modulo k + 1

But this means that for all such n we have that Pk/Qkn so indeed all Qkn have that as
a common subfactor.

If (n, k + 1) = d > 1 then we get as roots of Q only the nontrivial roots of unity of
order (k+1) (and of course roots of unity of higher order involving n) that are of the
form e^(2πidm/(k+1)), m = 1,.. (k+1)/d so in general, there is no common factor.

---

