# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 08:48:06
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.10.30
PROPERTIES OF THE INTEGERS
(1) (Well Ordering of Z) If A is any nonempty subset of Z+, there is some element
m∈ A such that m ≤ a, for all a ∈ A (m is called a minimal element of A).
(2) If a, b ∈ Z with a ≠ 0, we say a divides b if there is an element c ∈ Z such that
b = ac. In this case we write a | b; if a does not divide b we write a ∤ b.
(3) If a, b ∈ Z - {0}, there is a unique positive integer d, called the greatest common
divisor of a and b (or g.c.d. of a and b), satisfying:
(a) d | a and d | b (so d is a common divisor of a and b), and
(b) if e | a and e | b, then e | d (so d is the greatest such divisor).
The g.c.d. of a and b will be denoted by (a, b). If (a, b) = 1, we say that a and b
are relatively prime.
(4) If a, b ∈ Z - {0}, there is a unique positive integer l, called the least common
multiple of a and b (or l.c.m. of a and b), satisfying:
(a) a | l and b | l (so l is a common multiple of a and b), and
(b) if a | m and b | m, then l | m (so l is the least such multiple).
The connection between the greatest common divisor d and the least common
multiple l of two integers a and b is given by dl = ab.
(5) The Division Algorithm: if a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then there exist unique q, r ∈ Z such
that
a = qb + r and 0 ≤ r < |b|,
where q is the quotient and r the remainder. This is the usual "long division"
familiar from elementary arithmetic.
(6) The Euclidean Algorithm is an important procedure which produces a greatest
common divisor of two integers a and b by iterating the Division Algorithm: if
a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then we obtain a sequence of quotients and remainders
a = q₀b + r₀ (0)
b = q₁r₀ + r₁ (1)
r₀ = q₂r₁ + r₂ (2)
r₁ = q₃r₂ + r₃ (3)
⋮
rₙ₋₂ = qₙrₙ₋₁ + rₙ (n)
rₙ₋₁ = qₙ₊₁rₙ (n+1)
where rₙ is the last nonzero remainder. Such an rₙ exists since |b| > |r₀| > |r₁| >
... > |rₙ| is a decreasing sequence of strictly positive integers if the remainders
are nonzero and such a sequence cannot continue indefinitely. Then rₙ is the g.c.d.
(a, b) of a and b.

---

## 第 2 页

Example
Suppose a = 57970 and b = 10353. Then applying the Euclidean Algorithm we obtain:

57970=5x10353+6205
解:
10353 = 1x6205 + 4148
6205 = 1x4148 + 2057
4148 = 2x2057 +54
2057 = 60x14+17
(a,b)=17
34 = 2x17

(7) One consequence of the Euclidean Algorithm which we shall use regularly is the following: if a, b ∈ Z - {0}, then there exist x, y ∈ Z such that

(a, b) = ax + by

that is, the g.c.d. of a and b is a Z-linear combination of a and b. This follows by recursively writing the element rₙ in the Euclidean Algorithm in terms of the previous remainders (namely, use equation (n) above to solve for rₙ = rₙ₋₂-qₙrₙ₋₁ in terms of the remainders rₙ₋₁ and rₙ₋₂, then use equation (n - 1) to write rₙ in terms of the remainders rₙ₋₂ and rₙ₋₃, etc., eventually writing rₙ in terms of a and b).

(8) An element p of Z⁺ is called a prime if p > 1 and the only positive divisors of p are 1 and p (initially, the word prime will refer only to positive integers). An integer n > 1 which is not prime is called composite. For example, 2,3,5,7,11,13,17,19,... are primes and 4,6,8,9,10,12,14,15,16,18,... are composite.
An important property of primes (which in fact can be used to define the primes (cf. Exercise 3)) is the following: if p is a prime and p | ab, for some a, b ∈ Z, then either p | a or p | b.

(9) The Fundamental Theorem of Arithmetic says: if n ∈ Z, n > 1, then n can be factored uniquely into the product of primes, i.e., there are distinct primes p₁, p₂,..., pₛ and positive integers α₁, α₂,..., αₛ such that

n = p₁ᵃ¹ p₂ᵃ²... pₛᵃˢ.

This factorization is unique in the sense that if q₁, q₂,..., qₜ are any distinct primes and β₁, β₂,..., βₜ positive integers such that

n = q₁ᵝ¹ q₂ᵝ²... qₜᵝᵗ,

then s = t and if we arrange the two sets of primes in increasing order, then qᵢ = pᵢ and αᵢ = βᵢ, 1 ≤ i ≤ s. For example, n = 1852423848 = 2³3²11²19³31 and this decomposition into the product of primes is unique.
Suppose the positive integers a and b are expressed as products of prime powers:

a = p₁ᵃ¹ p₂ᵃ²... pₛᵃˢ, b = p₁ᵝ¹ p₂ᵝ²... pₜᵝᵗ

---

## 第 3 页

where p1, p2,..., ps are distinct and the exponents are ≥ 0 (we allow the exponents to be 0 here so that the products are taken over the same set of primes - the exponent will be 0 if that prime is not actually a divisor). Then the greatest common divisor of a and b is

(a, b) = p1^min(α1,β1) p2^min(α2,β2)... ps^min(αs,βs)

(10) The Euler φ-function is defined as follows: for n ∈ Z+ let φ(n) be the number of positive integers a ≤ n with a relatively prime to n, i.e., (a, n) = 1. For example, φ(12) = 4 since 1, 5, 7 and 11 are the only positive integers less than or equal to 12 which have no factors in common with 12. Similarly, φ(1) = 1, φ(2) = 1, φ(3) = 2, φ(4) = 2, φ(5) = 4, φ(6) = 2, etc. For primes p, φ(p) = p - 1, and, more generally, for all a ≥ 1 we have the formula

φ(pa) = pa - pa-1 = pa-1(p - 1).

The function φ is multiplicative in the sense that

φ(ab) = φ(a)φ(b) if (a, b) = 1

(note that it is important here that a and b be relatively prime). Together with the formula above this gives a general formula for the values of φ: if n = p1^α1 p2^α2... ps^αs, then

φ(n) = φ(p1^α1)φ(p2^α2)...φ(ps^αs)
= p1^α1-1(p1 - 1)p2^α2-1(p2 - 1)... ps^αs-1 (ps - 1).

For example, φ(12) = φ(22)φ(3) = 21(2 - 1)30(3 - 1) = 4. The reader should note that we shall use the letter φ for many different functions throughout the text so when we want this letter to denote Euler's function we shall be careful to indicate this explicitly.

---

