# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 09:08:20
> 总页数: 5
> 处理页数: 5

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.12.23
§7.7 Homotopy and simply connected spaces
Prototypical example for this section: C and C\{0}.
Now let's motivate the idea of homotopy. Consider the example of the complex plane
C (which you can think of just as R2) with two points p and q. There's a whole bunch of
paths from p to q but somehow they're not very different from one another. If I told you
"walk from p to q" you wouldn't have too many questions.

So we're living happily in C until a meteor strikes the origin, blowing it out of existence.
Then suddenly to get from p to q, people might tell you two different things: "go left
around the meteor" or "go right around the meteor".

So what's happening? In the first picture, the red, green, and blue paths somehow all
looked the same: if you imagine them as pieces of elastic string pinned down at p and q,
you can stretch each one to any other one.
But in the second picture, you can't move the red string to match with the blue string:
there's a meteor in the way. The paths are actually different.3
The formal notion we'll use to capture this is homotopy equivalence. We want to write
a definition such that in the first picture, the three paths are all homotopic, but the two
paths in the second picture are somehow not homotopic. And the idea is just continuous
deformation.

---

## 第 2 页

Definition 7.7.1. Let α and β be paths in X whose endpoints coincide. A (path) homotopy from α to β is a continuous function F: [0, 1]² → X, which we'll write Fₛ(t) for s, t ∈ [0, 1], such that

F₀(t) = α(t) and F₁(t) = β(t) for all t ∈ [0, 1]

and moreover

α(0) = β(0) = Fₛ(0) and α(1) = β(1) = Fₛ(1) for all s ∈ [0, 1].

If a path homotopy exists, we say α and β are path homotopic and write α ~ β.

What this definition is doing is taking α and "continuously deforming" it to β, while keeping the endpoints fixed. Note that for each particular s, Fₛ is itself a function. So s represents time as we deform α to β: it goes from 0 to 1, starting at α and ending at β.

C

p

F₀ = α

F₀.₂₅

F₀.₅

F₀.₇₅

F₁ = β

So now I can tell you what makes C special:

Definition 7.7.4. A space X is simply connected if it's path-connected and for any points p and q, all paths from p to q are homotopic.

That's why you don't ask questions when walking from p to q in C: there's really only one way to walk. Hence the term "simply" connected.

Definition 1.1. A semigroup is a nonempty set G together with a binary operation on G which is

(i) associative: a(bc) = (ab)c for all a, b, c ∈ G;

---

## 第 3 页

a monoid is a semigroup G which contains a

(ii) (two-sided) identity element e ∈ G such that ae = ea = a for all a ∈ G.

A group is a monoid G such that

(iii) for every a ∈ G there exists a (two-sided) inverse element a⁻¹ ∈ G such that a⁻¹a = aa⁻¹ = e.

A semigroup G is said to be abelian or commutative if its binary operation is

(iv) commutative: ab = ba for all a,b ∈ G.

Our principal interest is in groups. However, semigroups and monoids are convenient for stating certain theorems in the greatest generality. Examples are given below. The order of a group G is the cardinal number |G|. G is said to be finite [resp. infinite] if |G| is finite [resp. infinite].

Proposition 1.3. Let G be a semigroup. Then G is a group if and only if the following conditions hold:

(i) there exists an element e ∈ G such that ea = a for all a ∈ G (left identity element);

(ii) for each a ∈ G, there exists an element a⁻¹ ∈ G such that a⁻¹a = e (left inverse).

Proof: (⇒) Trivial. (⇐) We have a left identity element. Now we need to show it's two-sided.
(a⋅a⁻¹)⋅(a⋅a⁻¹) = a⋅(a⁻¹a)⋅a⁻¹ = aea⁻¹ = aa⁻¹
∴ aa⁻¹ = e a⁻¹ is also the right inverse.
a⋅e = a⋅(a⁻¹a) = (a⋅a⁻¹)⋅a = ea = a
∴ e is two-sided.
∴ G is a group.

Proposition 1.4. Let G be a semigroup. Then G is a group if and only if for all a, b ∈ G the equations ax = b and ya = b have solutions in G.

Proof: (⇒) Trivial. (⇐) a⁻¹. ax = a⁻¹b ⇒ x = a⁻¹b, ∴ a⋅a⁻¹b = b
∴ a⋅a⁻¹ = e
∴ a⁻¹ is two-sided inverse.
a⋅e = a⋅(a⁻¹a) = (a⋅a⁻¹)⋅a = ea = a
∴ e is two-sided.
∴ G is a group.

EXAMPLES. The integers Z, the rational numbers Q, and the real numbers R are each infinite abelian groups under ordinary addition. Each is a monoid under ordinary multiplication, but not a group (0 has no inverse). However, the nonzero elements of Q and R respectively form infinite abelian groups under multiplication. The even integers under multiplication form a semigroup that is not a monoid.

EXAMPLE. Consider the square with vertices consecutively numbered 1,2,3,4, center at the origin of the x-y plane, and sides parallel to the axes.

---

## 第 4 页

Let D* be the following set of "transformations" of the square. D₁* = {R,R2,R3,I,T,T,T1,3,T2,4}, where R is a counterclockwise rotation about the center of 90°, R² a counterclockwise rotation of 180°, R³ a counterclockwise rotation of 270°

EXAMPLE. Let S be a nonempty set and A(S) the set of all bijections S → S. Under the operation of composition of functions, f o g, A(S) is a group, since composition is associative, composition of bijections is a bijection, 1s is a bijection, and every bijection has an inverse (see (13) of Introduction, Section 3). The elements of A(S) are called permutations and A(S) is called the group of permutations on the set S. If S = {1,2,3,..., n}, then A(S) is called the symmetric group on n letters and denoted S. Verify that |S| = n! (Exercise 5). The groups S, play an important role in the theory of finite groups.

Since an element o of S, is a function on the finite set S = {1,2,..., n}, it can be described by listing the elements of S on a line and the image of each element under σ directly below it:
(1 2 3 ... n). The product στ of two elements of S, is the
i1 i2 i3 ... in
composition function 7 followed by o; that is, the function on S given by k → σ(r(k)).¹
For instance, let σ = (1 2 3 4) and r = (1 2 3 4) be elements of S4. Then
3 1 2 4) (4 1 2 3
under στ, 1 → σ(τ(1)) = σ(4) = 4, etc.; thus στ = (1 2 3 4)(1 2 3 4)
3 1 2 4) (4 1 2 3)
= (1 2 3 4); similarly, τσ = (1 2 3 4)(1 2 3 4) = (1 2 3 4)
4 3 1 2) (4 1 2 3) (3 1 2 4) (2 4 1 3)
This example also shows that S, need not be abelian.

Theorem 1.5. Let R (~) be an equivalence relation on a monoid G such that a₁ ~ a2 and b₁ ~ b₂ imply a₁b₁ ~ a2b2 for all a₁,b₁ & G. Then the set G/R of all equivalence classes of G under R is a monoid under the binary operation defined by (a)(b) = ab, where x denotes the equivalence class of x & G. If G is an [abelian] group, then so is G/R.

An equivalence relation on a monoid G that satisfies the hypothesis of the theorem is called a congruence relation on G.

---

## 第 5 页

2. HOMOMORPHISMS AND SUBGROUPS
Essential to the study of any class of algebraic objects are the functions that pre-
serve the given algebraic structure in the following sense.
Definition 2.1. Let G and H be semigroups. A function f: G → H is a homomorphism
provided
f(ab) = f(a)f(b) for all a,b ∈ G.
If f is injective as a map of sets, f is said to be a monomorphism. If f is surjective, f is
called an epimorphism. If f is bijective, f is called an isomorphism. In this case G and H
are said to be isomorphic (written G ≅ H). A homomorphism f: G → G is called an
endomorphism of G and an isomorphism f: G → G is called an automorphism of G.
If f: G → H and g: H → K are homomorphisms of semigroups, it is easy to see
that g ◦ f: G → K is also a homomorphism. Likewise the composition of monomor-
phisms is a monomorphism; similarly for epimorphisms, isomorphisms and auto-
morphisms. If G and H are groups with identities eG and eH respectively and
f: G → H is a homomorphism, then f(eG) = eH; however, this is not true for mon-
oids (Exercise 1). Furthermore f(a⁻¹) = f(a)⁻¹ for all a ∈ G (Exercise 1).
EXAMPLE. The map f: Z → Zm given by x ↦ x̄ (that is, each integer is mapped
onto its equivalence class in Zm) is an epimorphism of additive groups. f is called the
canonical epimorphism of Z onto Zm. Similarly, the map g: Q → Q/Z given by
r ↦ r̄ is also an epimorphism of additive groups.
EXAMPLE. Given groups G and H, there are four homomorphisms:
G ⇉ G × H ⇇ H, given by ι₁(g) = (g,e); ι₂(h) = (e,h); π₁(g,h) = g; π₂(g,h) = h.
ι₁ is a monomorphism and πᵢ is an epimorphism (i,j = 1,2).

Kerf、生成子群明天再说吧。

---

