# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-18 23:01:34
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.04.07 SECTION 1.A R" and C" 11
EXERCISES 1.A

1 Suppose a and b are real numbers, not both 0, Find real numbers c and d such that Considering (a+bi)(a-bi) = a²+b², one has a²+b² = c+di.
1/(a+bi) = c + di. Thus, c = a/(a²+b²), d = -b/(a²+b²)

2 Show that Note that (a+bi)(a-bi) = 2A, so to ±√i is a root -1+√3i
and (a+bi)(a-bi) = -1 of equation.
and ±√i = ±1-i 2
-1+√3i
2
Because x³=1 (x-1)(x²+x+1)=0
is a cube root of 1 (meaning that its cube equals 1).
Let (a+bi)² = i a²-b²+2abi=i
Find two distinct square roots of i.
so two roots are e^(πi/4), e^(5πi/4) use e^(ix) = cosx + isinx (XGR) to solve.

4 Show that α + β = β + α for all α, β ∈ C.
Let α be (x₁+y₁i), β be (x₂+y₂i), use associativity of
(α+β) = (a+bi)+(c+di) = (a+c)+(b+d)i
(β+α) = (c+di)+(a+bi) = (c+a)+(d+b)i

5 Show that (α + β) + λ = α + (β + λ) for all α, β, λ ∈ C.
addition in R to proof. Process is similar to Exercise 4.

6 Show that (αβ)λ = α(βλ) for all α, β, λ ∈ C.
Let α = x₁+y₁i, β = x₂+y₂i, λ = x₃+y₃i, use distributive property and orders in R to proof.

7 Show that for every α ∈ C, there exists a unique β ∈ C such that α + β = 0.
Let α = a+bi and β = c+di, so α+β = (a+bi)+(c+di) = (a+c)+(b+d)i.
for each member x ∈ R, we can find a member written x to make x+0=0. So a+c and b+d can be 0. So do a+β.

8 Show that for every α ∈ C with α ≠ 0, there exists a unique β ∈ C such that αβ = 1.
Let α = a+bi, β = c+di. We had the result of Exercise 1, so we now should show its uniqueness.
If αβ = 1, then β = 1/α = (1/α)·α·β = 1/α·(α·β) = 1/α (use the result of Exercise 6).

9 Show that λ(α + β) = λα + λβ for all λ, α, β ∈ C. Let λ = a+bi, α = x₁+y₁i, β = x₂+y₂i
then, λ(α+β) = λ(x₁+y₁i, x₂+y₂i) = λ(x₁+y₁i) + λ(x₂+y₂i) = (ax₁+by₁, ax₂+by₂)

10 Find x ∈ R⁴ such that (4, -3, 1, 7) + 2x = (5, 9, -6, 8).
Because (4, -3, 1, 7) + 2x = (5, 9, -6, 8), so 2x = (5, 9, -6, 8) - (4, -3, 1, 7) = (1, 12, -7, 1).
so x = (1/2, 6, -7/2, 1/2)

11 Explain why there does not exist λ ∈ C such that
If the number λ is exist, then λ(2-3i) = 12-5i, λ(5+4i) = 7+22i. So (2-3i)(7+22i) = (12-5i)(5+4i).
It means λ(2-3i, 5+4i, -6+7i) = (12-5i, 7+22i, -32-9i).
20-17i = 80+23i. Thus such λ ∈ C does not exist.

12 Show that (x + y) + z = x + (y + z) for all x, y, z ∈ Fⁿ.
Suppose x = (x₁,... xₙ), y = (y₁,... yₙ), z = (z₁,... zₙ). Process is similar to the proof of the conclusion in C.

13 Show that (ab)x = a(bx) for all x ∈ Fⁿ and all a, b ∈ F.
Suppose x = (x₁,... xₙ), so (ab)x = (abx₁, abx₂, ..., abxₙ) = (a(bx₁), a(bx₂), ..., a(bxₙ)) = a(bx)

14 Show that 1x = x for all x ∈ Fⁿ.
Suppose x = (x₁,... xₙ), 1x = x

15 Show that λ(x + y) = λx + λy for all λ ∈ F and all x, y ∈ Fⁿ.

16 Show that (a + b)x = ax + bx for all a, b ∈ F and all x ∈ Fⁿ.
Suppose x = (x₁,... xₙ), so (a+b)x = ((a+b)x₁, ..., (a+b)xₙ) = (ax₁+bx₁, ..., axₙ+bxₙ) = ax + bx

---

## 第 2 页

SECTION 1.B Definition of Vector Space 17

1.31 The number -1 times a vector
(-1)v = -v for every v ∈ V.

Proof For v ∈ V, we have
v + (-1)v = 1v + (-1)v = (1+(-1))v = 0v = 0.

This equation says that (-1)v, when added to v, gives 0. Thus (-1)v is the additive inverse of v, as desired.

EXERCISES 1.B
1 Prove that -(-v) = v for every v ∈ V.
2 Suppose a ∈ F, v ∈ V, and av = 0. Prove that a = 0 or v = 0.
3 Suppose v, w ∈ V. Explain why there exists a unique x ∈ V such that v + 3x = w.
4 The empty set is not a vector space. The empty set fails to satisfy only one of the requirements listed in 1.19.
5 Show that in the definition of a vector space (1.19), the additive inverse condition can be replaced with the condition that.

Let ∞ and -∞ denote two distinct objects, neither of which is in R.
Define an addition and scalar multiplication on R ∪ {∞} ∪ {-∞} as you could guess from the notation. Specifically, the sum and product of two real numbers is as usual, and for t ∈ R define

t⋅∞ =
{
∞ if t > 0,
0 if t = 0,
-∞ if t < 0,
t⋅(-∞) =
{
-∞ if t > 0,
0 if t = 0,
∞ if t < 0.
}

1 + ∞ = ∞ + 1 = ∞, 1 + (-∞) = (-∞) + 1 = -∞,
∞ + ∞ = ∞, (-∞) + (-∞) = -∞, ∞ + (-∞) = 0.

Is R ∪ {∞} ∪ {-∞} a vector space over R? Explain.

---

## 第 3 页

SECTION 1.C Subspaces 19

If u ∈ U, then -u [which equals (-1)u by 1.31] is also in U by the third condition above. Hence every element of U has an additive inverse in U.
The other parts of the definition of a vector space, such as associativity and commutativity, are automatically satisfied for U because they hold on the larger space V. Thus U is a vector space and hence is a subspace of V.

The three conditions in the result above usually enable us to determine quickly whether a given subset of V is a subspace of V. You should verify all the assertions in the next example.

1.35 Example subspaces

(a) If b ∈ F, then (0,0,0,0) is in it if and only if it b=0. Obviously, it satisfies closed under addition and scalar multiplication. {(x1,x2, x3, x4) ∈ F⁴: x3 = 5x4 + b} is a subspace of F⁴ if and only if b = 0.

(b) The set of continuous real-valued functions on the interval [0, 1] is a subspace of R[0,1]. Similar to (a)

(c) The set of differentiable real-valued functions on R is a subspace of RR. Similar to (a)

(d) The set of differentiable real-valued functions f on the interval (0, 3) such that f'(2) = b is a subspace of R(0,3) if and only if b = 0. Similar to (a)

(e) The set of all sequences of complex numbers with limit 0 is a subspace of C∞. Obviously (0, 0, ...) is an element ofit. Closed under addition: Consider (a₁, a₂...) and (b₁, b₂...) The limit of them are both 0. Thus, the limit of (a₁+b₁, a₂+b₂)... = lim (an + bn) = (lim an + lim bn)

Verifying some of the items above shows the linear structure underlying parts of calculus. For example, the second item above requires the result that the sum of two continuous functions is continuous. As another example, the fourth item above requires the result that for a constant c, the derivative of cf equals c times the derivative of f.

Clearly {0} is the smallest subspace of V and V itself is the largest subspace of V. The empty set is not a subspace of V because a subspace must be a vector space and hence must contain at least one element, namely, an additive identity.

Closed under scalar multiplication. Consider (a₁, a₂...) such that lim aₙ = 0. Thus, lim λaₙ (λ∈R) = 0. = lim λ·0 = 0.

The subspaces of R² are precisely {0}, R², and all lines in R² through the origin. The subspaces of R³ are precisely {0}, R³, all lines in R³ through the origin, and all planes in R³ through the origin. To prove that all these objects are indeed subspaces is easy-the hard part is to show that they are the only subspaces of R² and R³. That task will be easier after we introduce some additional tools in the next chapter.

---

