# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 09:19:36
> 总页数: 4
> 处理页数: 4

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2023.03.13
Category Theory (Continued)

Example 60.2.8 (Posets are categories)
Let P be a partially ordered set. We can construct a category P for it as follows:
• The objects of P are going to be the elements of P.
• The arrows of P are defined as follows:
- For every object p ∈ P, we add an identity arrow idp, and
- For any pair of distinct objects p ≤ q, we add a single arrow p → q.
There are no other arrows.
• There's only one way to do the composition. What is it?
这其实是一个并不陌生的例子,之前在Geek学院时听的Cat.就有。≤也可作为arrow
For example, for the poset P on four objects {a, b, c, d} with a ≤ b and a ≤ c ≤ d, we get:

This illustrates the point that
The arrows of a category can be totally different from functions.

Definition 60.2.5. An arrow A₁ → A₂ is an isomorphism if there exists A₂ → A₁ such that f ◦ g = idA₂ and g ◦ f = idA₁. In that case we say A₁ and A₂ are isomorphic, hence A₁ ≅ A₂.

---

## 第 2 页

Question 60.2.9. Check that no two distinct objects of a poset are isomorphic.
Obviously.

Example 60.2.10 (Important: groups are one-Object categories)
A group G can be interpreted as a category G with one object *, all of whose arrows are isomorphisms.

1 = ida

g2 g4

g3

As [Le14] says:

The first time you meet the idea that a group is a kind of category, it's tempting to dismiss it as a coincidence or a trick. It's not: there's real content. To see this, suppose your education had been shuffled and you took a course on category theory before ever learning what a group was. Someone comes to you and says:

"There are these structures called 'groups', and the idea is this: a group is what you get when you collect together all the symmetries of a given thing."

"What do you mean by a 'symmetry'?" you ask.

"Well, a symmetry of an object X is a way of transforming X or mapping X into itself, in an invertible way."

"Oh," you reply, "that's a special case of an idea I've met before. A category is the structure formed by lots of objects and mappings between them - not necessarily invertible. A group's just the very special case where you've only got one object, and all the maps happen to be invertible."

Шит, лянхуй шици фаньбиляющям. ханьбуляо MSE.
Целл. хуала 20 мин щай шапцен МЅЕ, ю и га ши ижеян шуо да:

Yes, you can. Define a category M with just one formal object say ob(M) = {X}. Let G be a group. Define Mor(X, X) = underlying set of G, and composition of morphisms in Mor(X, X) by the binary operation on G. The identity morphism on X is just the identity element in G. Then you can verify that all axioms of a category are satisfied by M. Since each element in G has an inverse, note, moreover, that every element in Mor(X, X) is an isomorphism. In

---

## 第 3 页

这其实有点抽象,不过也恰恰说明了arrow可以是很怪的东西。你定义的Mor并不一定符合直觉上Mor的含义,它不一定对obj执行了什么操作或是某种 relation.
下面跳回 product.
Of course, we can define products of more than just one object. Consider a set of objects (Xi)i∈I in a category A. We define a cone on the Xi to be an object A with some "projection" maps to each Xi. Then the product is a cone P which is "universal" in the same sense as before: given any other cone A there is a unique map A → P making the diagram commute. In short, a product is a "universal cone".
The picture of this is

cone 似乎真看翻译成锥

See also Problem 60C.
One can also do the dual construction to get a coproduct: given X and Y, it's the object X + Y together with maps X → X + Y and Y → X + Y (that's Greek iota, think inclusion) such that for any object A and maps X → A, Y → A there is a unique f for which

Exercise 60.4.7. Describe the coproduct in Set.
Predictable terminology: a coproduct is a universal cocone.
Spoiler alert later on: this construction can be generalized vastly to so-called "limits", and we'll do so later on.
集合的余积是无交并。但这个无交并不是我曾经理解的那种(На ящи буши ичжи доу лицуње цуля На чжен иши що дань.)
这里无友并指给A.B中每个元素配上一个“标识元素”使其原本的重复元素被视为不同的。
由此可知,一定有X→X+Y的一个map lx,而f的存在性也是显然的,可确定,因而于唯一。
直观来说,如果记X→X+Y, x→(x,*),那么f:(x,*)→g(x),即忽略”标识”。Y同理。下面放上无交并的定义防止忘了

---

## 第 4 页

The disjoint union of two sets A and B is a binary operator that combines all distinct elements of a pair of given sets, while retaining the original set membership as a distinguishing characteristic of the union set. The disjoint union is denoted

A ∪* B = (A × {0}) ∪ (B × {1}) = A* ∪ B*. (1)

where A × S is a Cartesian product. For example, the disjoint union of sets A = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and B = {1, 2, 3, 4} can be computed by finding

A* = {(1, 0), (2, 0), (3, 0), (4, 0), (5, 0)} (2)
B* = {(1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 1), (4, 1)}, (3)

so

A ∪* B = A* ∪ B* (4)
= {(1, 0), (2, 0), (3, 0), (4, 0), (5, 0), (1, 1), (2, 1), (3, 1), (4, 1)}. (5)

The notion of "injective" doesn't make sense in an arbitrary category since arrows need not be functions. The correct categorical notion is:

Definition 60.5.1. A map X → Y is monic (or a monomorphism) if for any commutative diagram

A → X → Y

we must have g = h. In other words, f ◦ g = f ◦ h ⇒ g = h.

Definition 60.5.6. A map X → Y is epic (or an epimorphism) if for any commutative diagram

X → Y → A

we must have g = h. In other words, g ◦ f = h ◦ f ⇒ g = h.

This is kind of like surjectivity, although it's a little farther than last time. Note that in concrete categories, surjective ⇒ epic.

---

