# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 09:09:34
> 总页数: 7
> 处理页数: 7

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.12.29

Algebraic Topology & Algebra
下面写一下S'xS'=T的介理解:
可以把刀相为一个竖过来的S,绕一个水平的S,转一周,其边界的轨迹形成的点集。

我们选取与点分析:

:可构造映射:f:S'xS'→T, (x,y) ∈ S'xS', x=(m,n), y=(a,b)
(x,y) ↦ (m(2π+a), n(2π+a), b)
显然子是一个同胚映射。
^ S'xS' = T
§57.4 Disjoint union and wedge sum

Prototypical example for this section: S¹ V S¹ is the figure eight.

The disjoint union of two spaces is geometrically exactly what it sounds like: you just
imagine the two spaces side by side. For completeness, here is the formal definition.

Definition 57.4.1. Let X and Y be two topological spaces. The disjoint union,
denoted X II Y, is defined by

*   The points are the disjoint union X II Y, and
*   A subset U ⊆ X II Y is open if and only if U ∩ X and U ∩ Y are open.

Exercise 57.4.2. Show that the disjoint union of two nonempty spaces is disconnected.

Proof: Suppose Tx = {∅, Ux₁, Ux₂, ..., X}, Ty = {∅, Uy₁, Uy₂, ..., Y}
It's easy to show all Uxi and Uyi's joint (finity) is open in X II Y, so do X, Y
We want to show X ∪ Y ∈ Tx∪y, X ∪ Uyi ∈ Tx∪y, Y ∪ Uxᵢ ∈ Tx∪y
The above is incorrect. Now rewrite. (Мы нет кноу Uxi с Uyi ис опен в X II Y)
Шую шихуа я реклй нет кноу надто прув а сет ис опен. Я кноу оно не обвкоус тхат X ∪ Y
аре онем в X II Y бат вхэт нид я до то шод его. Ulum.
我就是mad,竟然忘了条件。就一句话:

*   X ∪ Y is open,
*   (X ∪ Y) ∩ X = X, (X ∪ Y) ∩ Y = Y are both open
*   X, Y are both clopen, which impilies the disconnection.

---

## 第 2 页

More interesting is the wedge sum, where two topological spaces X and Y are fused together only at a single base point.

Definition 57.4.3. Let X and Y be topological spaces, and x₀ ∈ X and y₀ ∈ Y be points. We define the equivalence relation ~ by declaring x₀ ~ y₀ only. Then the wedge sum of two spaces is defined as

X ∨ Y = (X ∐ Y)/~.

Example 57.4.4 (S¹ ∨ S¹ is a figure eight)
Let X = S¹ and Y = S¹, and let x₀ ∈ X and y₀ ∈ Y be any points. Then X ∨ Y is a "figure eight": it is two circles fused together at one point.

Abuse of Notation 57.4.5. We often don't mention x₀ and y₀ when they are understood (or irrelevant). For example, from now on we will just write S¹ ∨ S¹ for a figure eight.

Remark 57.4.6 — Annoyingly, in LATEX \wedge gives ∧ instead of ∨ (which is \vee). So this really should be called the "vee product", but too late.

确实。之前敲 Boolean algebra时就是这样高敲错的。

§57.5 CW complexes

Using this construction, we can start building some spaces. One common way to do so is using a so-called CW complex. Intuitively, a CW complex is built as follows:

*   Start with a set of points X⁰.

*   Define X¹ by taking some line segments (copies of D¹) and fusing the endpoints (copies of S⁰) onto X⁰.

*   Define X² by taking copies of D² (a disk) and welding its boundary (a copy of S¹) onto X¹.

*   Repeat inductively up until a finite stage n; we say X is n-dimensional.

The resulting space X is the CW-complex. The set Xᵏ is called the *k-skeleton* of X. Each Dᵏ is called a *k-cell*; it is customary to denote it by eαᵏ where α is some index. We say that X is *finite* if only finitely many cells were used.

Abuse of Notation 57.5.1. Technically, most sources (like [Hao2]) allow one to construct infinite-dimensional CW complexes. We will not encounter any such spaces in the Napkin.

---

## 第 3 页

Example 57.5.2 (D² with 2+2+1 and 1+1+1 cells)
(a) First, we start with X⁰ having two points e⁰ₐ and e⁰ь. Then, we join them with two 1-cells D¹ (green), call them e¹c and e¹d. The endpoints of each 1-cell (the copy of S⁰) get identified with distinct points of X⁰; hence X¹ ≈ S¹. Finally, we take a single 2-cell e² (yellow) and weld it in, with its boundary fitting into the copy of S¹ that we just drew. This gives the figure on the left.

(b) In fact, one can do this using just 1+1+1 = 3 cells. Start with X⁰ having a single point e⁰. Then, use a single 1-cell e¹, fusing its two endpoints into the single point of X⁰. Then, one can fit in a copy of S¹ as before, giving D² as on the right.

Example 57.5.3 (Sⁿ as a CW complex)
(a) One can obtain Sⁿ (for n ≥ 1) with just two cells. Namely, take a single point e⁰ for X⁰, and to obtain Sⁿ take Dⁿ and weld its entire boundary into e⁰.
We already saw this example in the beginning with n = 2, when we saw that the sphere S² was the result when we fuse the boundary of a disk D² together.

(b) Alternatively, one can do a "hemisphere" construction, by constructing Sⁿ inductively using two cells in each dimension. So S⁰ consists of two points, then S¹ is obtained by joining these two points by two segments (1-cells), and S² is obtained by gluing two hemispheres (each a 2-cell) with S¹ as its equator.

Definition 57.5.4. Formally, for each k-cell eᵏₐ we want to add to Xᵏ, we take its boundary Sᵏ⁻¹ₐ and weld it onto Xᵏ⁻¹ via an attaching map Sᵏ⁻¹ₐ → Xᵏ⁻¹. Then

Xᵏ = Xᵏ⁻¹ ∐ (∐ eᵏₐ) / ~

where ~ identifies each boundary point of eᵏₐ with its image in Xᵏ⁻¹.

§57.6 The torus, Klein bottle, ℝPⁿ, ℂPⁿ

---

## 第 4 页

§57.6.i The torus

The torus can be formed by taking a square and identifying the opposite edges in the same direction: if you walk off the right edge, you re-appear at the corresponding point in on the left edge. (Think Asteroids from Atari!)

Thus the torus is (R/Z)² ≈ S¹ x S¹.

Note that all four corners get identified together to a single point. One can realize the torus in 3-space by treating the square as a sheet of paper, taping together the left and right (red) edges to form a cylinder, then bending the cylinder and fusing the top and bottom (blue) edges to form the torus.

Definition 4.1. Let H be a subgroup of a group G and a,b ∈ G. a is right congruent to b modulo H, denoted a ≡ᵣ b (mod H) if ab⁻¹ ∈ H. a is left congruent to b modulo H, denoted a ≡ₗ b (mod H), if a⁻¹b ∈ H.

Theorem 4.2. Let H be a subgroup of a group G.

(i) Right [resp. left] congruence modulo H is an equivalence relation on G.
(ii) The equivalence class of a ∈ G under right [resp. left] congruence modulo H is the set Ha = {ha | h ∈ H} [resp. aH = {ah | h ∈ H}].
(iii) |Ha| = |H| = |aH| for all a ∈ G.

The set Ha is called a right coset of H in G and aH is called a left coset of H in G. In general it is not the case that a right coset is also a left coset (Exercise 2).

Proof: We write a≡ᵣb for a≡ᵣb(mod H)
(i) reflexive: aa⁻¹=e ∈ H ⇒ a≡ᵣa
symmetric: a≡ᵣb ⇒ ab⁻¹ ∈ H ⇒ (ab⁻¹)⁻¹ = ba⁻¹ ∈ H ⇒ b≡ᵣa
transitive: a≡ᵣb, b≡ᵣc ⇒ ab⁻¹ ∈ H, bc⁻¹ ∈ H ⇒ ab⁻¹bc⁻¹ = ac⁻¹ ∈ H ⇒ a≡ᵣc
(ii) ā = {x | x≡ᵣa} = {x | xa⁻¹ ∈ H} = {x | xa⁻¹ = h ∈ H} = {x | x = ha ∈ H} = {ha | h ∈ H}
(iii) f: H → Ha, h ↦ ha is a bijection

Corollary 4.3. Let H be a subgroup of a group G.

(i) G is the union of the right [resp. left] cosets of H in G.
(ii) Two right [resp. left] cosets of H in G are either disjoint or equal.
(iii) For all a,b ∈ G, Ha = Hb ⇔ ab⁻¹ ∈ H and aH = bH ⇔ a⁻¹b ∈ H.
(iv) If R is the set of distinct right cosets of H in G and L is the set of distinct left cosets of H in G, then |R| = |L|.

---

## 第 5 页

(iv) R→L, Ha → b'H is a bijection, since ab⁻¹ → b'a is the same.

ADDITIVE NOTATION. If H is a subgroup of an additive group, then right congruence modulo H is defined by: a ≡ b (mod H) ⇔ a - b ∈ H. The equivalence class of a ∈ G is the right coset H + a = {h + a | h ∈ H}; similarly for left congruence and left cosets.

Definition 4.4. Let H be a subgroup of a group G. The index of H in G, denoted [G : H], is the cardinal number of the set of distinct right [resp. left] cosets of H in G.

In view of Corollary 4.3 (iv), [G : H] does not depend on whether right or left cosets are used in the definition. Our principal interest is in the case when [G : H] is finite, which can occur even when G and H are infinite groups (for example, [Z : <m>] = m by Introduction, Theorem 6.8(i)). Note that if H = <e>, then Ha = {a} for every a ∈ G and [G : H] = |G|.

好我们暂且回到Alg.Top,在此意义下,IR/Z很显然可被视为[0,1),这样又有了另一个S'xS' = 丌的理解:
S' x S' = [0,1] x [0,1] = (IR/Z)² = 丌。好,回到Napkin:

The torus can be realized as a CW complex with
• A 0-skeleton consisting of a single point,
• A 1-skeleton consisting of two 1-cells e¹a, e¹b, and

---

## 第 6 页

*   A 2-skeleton with a single 2-cell e², whose circumference is divided into four parts, and welded onto the 1-skeleton "via aba⁻¹b⁻¹". This means: wrap a quarter of the circumference around eₐ¹, then another quarter around e♭¹, then the third quarter around eₐ¹ but in the opposite direction, and the fourth quarter around e♭¹ again in the opposite direction as before.

We say that aba⁻¹b⁻¹ is the attaching word; this shorthand will be convenient later on.

我能理解图,但我还是不明白 attaching word,估计是群论基础缺失。Klein bottle 也是:

§57.6.ii The Klein bottle

The Klein bottle is defined similarly to the torus, except one pair of edges is identified in the opposite manner, as shown.

Unlike the torus one cannot realize this in 3-space without self-intersecting. One can tape together the red edges as before to get a cylinder, but to then fuse the resulting blue circles in opposite directions is not possible in 3D. Nevertheless, we often draw a picture in 3-dimensional space in which we tacitly allow the cylinder to intersect itself.

---

## 第 7 页

Like the torus, the Klein bottle is realized as a CW complex with
• One 0-cell,
• Two 1-cells $e_a^1$ and $e_b^1$, and
• A single 2-cell attached this time via the word $abab^{-1}$.
另外我看这个图竟然看了半小时,我感觉我已经学不成代拓了:

a
b
a
c

a
d
c
b

e
a
b
a
c
d
b
a
b
a
d
c
d
c
b
a
b
a

---

