# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 08:50:20
> 总页数: 7
> 处理页数: 7

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2022.11.20
13.2.1 Definition of elliptic curves

An Elliptic Curve (EC) is the set of solutions (x, y) of an equation of the form y² = x³ + ax + b, where a and b are real coefficients. See Figure 13.2.2 below for graphs of some elliptic curves. Additionally, ECs are not allowed

y² = x³-1
y² = x³+1
y² = x³-3x+3
y² = x³-4x
y² = x³-x

Figure 13.2.2. Geometric shapes of elliptic curves, (from reference (15)) to have double or triple roots in the variable x. A triple root produces a cusp in the graph, and a double root produces a self-intersection (see graphs in Figure 13.2.3). See graphs in Figure 13.2.3 for examples of elliptic curves with double and triple roots. It turns out that we can guarantee that the EC

Figure 13.2.3. (Left) E: y² = x³ and (Right) E: y² = x³-3x + 2, (From reference (7)

has no double or triple roots if the coefficients a and b satisfy the following equation: 4a³+ 27b² ≠ 0.

Exercise 13.2.2.

(a) Prove that if the equation y² = x³ + ax + b has a double or triple root, then 4a³ + 27b² = 0. (*Hint*)

(b) Prove the converse to part (a), that is show that if 4a³+27b² = 0, then the equation has a double or triple root. (*Hint*)

---

## 第 2 页

证明:(a)如果有 double root,那么x³+ax+b可写作(x-r₁)2(x-r₂),展开可知a,b的系数,
让其=0即可。 (b)见证。

Exercise 13.2.2 (a): If there is a double root, then it must be that 0 =
x³+ax+b has a double root. This means that the equation can be factored:
x³+ ax + b = (x-r₁)²(x-r₂). Express a and b in terms of r₁ and r₂. (A
similar approach can be used in the case of a triple root.)

Exercise 13.2.2 (b): There are 2 cases: (i) b = 0, (ii) b≠0. In the case
b≠0, first, show that a > 0. Then use part (a) to express r₁ and r₂ in
terms of a and b, and show the equation factors properly.

All of the cryptosystems that we have studied so far have been based on
group operations associated with a particular group. For example, Diffie-
Hellman used discrete exponentiation (which is repeated multiplication in
U(p)) to construct a one-way function. In order to use elliptic curves to
construct cryptosystems, we'll need to show that we can associate a group
with each elliptic curve. In the following sections we'll define an arithmetic
operation on the points of any elliptic curve, an show that this operation is
in fact a group operation.

13.2.2 Elliptic curve arithmetic

In this section, we show how to do arithmetic on elliptic curves. Specifically,
we define an operation (denoted by '+') which acts on two points of an
elliptic curve, to give another point on the same curve.

Suppose that P₁ and P₂ are two points on an EC. We will consider
first the case where P₁ ≠ P₂: later we will consider the case where P₁ = P₂.
Geometrically, if the two points are different then P₁+P₂ is given by drawing
a line from point P₁ to point P₂ and continuing the line until it intersects
the elliptic curve, then reflect that point about the x-axis. See Figure 13.2.4
for a geometric representation of the operation P1 + P2.

It turns out that P1 + P2 is always defined on the EC (except in one
special case which we will explain a little bit later), even though sometimes
the result of P₁+ P2 is quite far away from both P₁ and P2. For instance,
take E: y² = x³ - x, and points P₁ = (2,√6) and P₂ = (3,-√24). Then
P1+P2 = (49,342.93) (we'll show this later in Example 13.2.6), as illustrated
in Figure 13.2.5.

---

## 第 3 页

(P1+P2)
P1
P2
(P1+P2)'
Figure 13.2.4. Adding two distinct points, P1 + P2 on the EC (from reference (9)).

P1
P2
y² = x³ - x
(P1+P2)'
Figure 13.2.5. P1 + P2 is always defined on the EC (from reference (9)).

Example 13.2.3. Given E: y² = x³ + ax + b, P₁ = (x1, y1), P2 = (x2, y2), and P3 = (x3, y3). Find P3, where P3 = P1 + P2.
The steps of this calculation are as follows:

(a) Compute the slope of the line m through P₁ and P₂ as follows:
m = (y2 - y1) ⋅ (x2 - x1)⁻¹, for P1 ≠ P2

(b) Use the point-slope formula y - y1 = m(x - x1) in order to find equation of the line that passes through the two points. Rewrite as:
y = m(x - x1) + y1

---

## 第 4 页

(c) It turns out that the sum of the roots is m² (see Exercise 13.2.4). So we have 高次韦达定理
x1 + x2 + x3 = m², which implies x3 = m² - x1 - x2.

(d) The third point of intersection is (x3, -y3). So we may plug x3 into (-y3) = m(x3 - x1) + y1 to obtain y3.

(e) Finished! P3 = (x3, y3).

P₃ = (x3, y3) = ((y1-y3/x1-x3)² - x1 - x2, (x1-x3)y1-(y1-y3)x1/x1-x3 + y1)

Exercise 13.2.4. In part (c) of Example 13.2.3 we mentioned that x1 + x2 + x3 = m², where x1, x2, x3 are the x-coordinates of three intersections of the a with the EC and m is the slope of the line. In this exercise, we will prove this.

(a) Substitute the equation for y in (b) of Example 13.2.3 into equation E. The resulting equation can be rearranged to form a cubic equation in x of the form: 0 = x³ + c2x² + c1x + c0, where c0, c1, c2 depend on the parameters a, b, m, x1, y1. Express the coefficient c2 in terms of these parameters.

(b) The cubic equation 0 = x³ + c2x² + c1x + c0 has three roots, so the cubic equation can be factored: x³ + c2x² + c1x + c0 = (x - x1)(x - x2)(x - x3). Use this equality to express c2 in terms of x1, x2, x3.

(c) Based on your results in (a) and (b), show that m² = x1 + x2 + x3.

Vieta's Theorem/Zero-coefficient Relationship
Assume x1, x2,..., xn are the roots of the polynomial

P(x) = anxⁿ + an-1xⁿ⁻¹ + ··· + a1x + a0,

then

x1 + x2 + x3 + ··· + xn = -an-1/an,

x1x2 + x1x3 + ··· + xn xn-1 = an-2/an,

...

x1x2x3 ··· xn = (-1)ⁿ a0/an · 知乎 @双木止月Tong

---

## 第 5 页

Vieta's Theorem for cubic polynomials
If x1, x2 and x3 are three roots of the quadratic polynomial
ax³ + bx² + cx + d, then
• x1 + x2 + x3 = -b/a
• x1x2 + x1x3 + x2x3 = c/a
• x1x2x3 = -d/a
• x1² + x2² + x3² = (-b/a)² - 2(c/a)

(这些补充-一些由此而得的推论:
(1)复数根都是成对出现的;

根据高次韦达定理,所有根的和、乘积等都是实数(ai ∈ R),
如果有复数根一定是与其共轭一起成对出现的,即a+bi与
a-bi一起出现。
1. 那么告诉我们一个复数根,其实是告诉了我们方程的两个根;
2. 如果多项式的度(Degree of the Polynomials,多项式最高次)是
奇数,那么一定存在实数根,因为复数根成对出现;

(2)试根法

*The Rational Zero Test
If an, an-1,..., a0 are integers, and if p/q is a solution of
anxn + an-1xn-1 + ... + a1x + a0 = 0,

and p and q relatively prime, then p|a0 and q|an.

图:试根法

因为x1x2x3...xn = (-1)ⁿ a0/an, 那么如果存在一个根 p/q, 那么
p是a0 的因子,q是an 的因子。

---

## 第 6 页

Exercise 13.2.7. Given E: y² = x³ – 2x, P₁ = (2, 2), P₂ = (-1,1), find P₃,
where P₃ = P₁ + P₂.

解: k = (2-1)/(2-(-1)) = 1/3
直线方程: y-2 = 1/3(x-2)
x₁ + x₂ + x₃ = k² = 1/9
x₃ = 1/9 - (-1) - 2 = -26/9, y₃ = -26/27 + 2 = 28/27
P₃ (-26/9, 28/27)

If the two points are the same, P₁ = P₂ = (x₁, y₁), then a tangent line to
the point is drawn and the point of intersection to the EC is then reflected
about the x-axis. This is often referred to as point doubling. The slope
for this line is,
m = (3x₁² + a) · (2y₁)⁻¹,

which may be found using implicit differentiation (note that a refers to
the coefficient of x in the elliptic curve equation-see Example 13.2.3). See
Figure 13.2.6 below for a geometrical representation of point doubling.

Exercise 13.2.9. Derive the equation for m by taking derivatives of both
sides of equation E and solving for dy/dx. Show your steps.

解: 隐函数求导。设y² = x³ + ax + b
2yy' = 3x² + a
dy/dx = (3x² + a) (2y)⁻¹
k = (3x² + a) (2y)⁻¹

In the case of point doubling, once m is found the expression for the x
coordinate of the other intersection of the tangent line with the curve is:

x₃ = m² - x₁ - x₁

(this is because x₁ is a double root of the cubic expression which gives the
x-coordinates of the intersections between the EC and the tangent line).
Once we have x₃, then we may find y₃ as before:

-y₃ = m(x₃ - x₁) + y₁

and 2P₁ is given by (x₃, y₃).

---

## 第 7 页

Figure 13.2.6. Point doubling on the EC (from reference (7)).

There is one scenario where addition of two points doesn't give a point on the curve. Given a point *P*, we define *-P* as the reflection of *P* about the x axis: so if *P* = (*x*, *y*), then *-P* = (*x*, -*y*). The line through *P* and *-P* is vertical, and does not intersect the curve at any other point. In order to make addition well-defined in this case we may create a notional point at infinity. See Figure 13.2.7 below for a geometrical representation of the point at infinity. The point at infinity can be thought of as located at

All vertical lines on the EC reach the point of infinity

These two points of infinity are actually the same

Figure 13.2.7. The point at infinity located at (0,∞) (from reference (9)).

the point (0,∞), so that the line through any point (*x*, *y*) and the point at infinity is a vertical line with infinite slope. Additionally, the point at infinity is its own reflection, so we consider (0,∞) and (0,-∞) as a single point, which we denote by the symbol ∞. You may think of the y axis "wrapping around" so that when you keep moving in the +y direction eventually you wrap around to the -y axis.

---

