# PDF文档内容提取
> 提取时间: 2025-09-19 18:11:11
> 总页数: 3
> 处理页数: 3

## 第 1 页

INFORMAL NOTES ON
MATHEMATICS
2021.02.07

The Axiom of Choice, Cardinal
Numbers, etc.

This chapter includes Section 0.7 to 0.8 of the original book.
Axiom 3.0.1 (Axiom of Choice). The product of a family of nonempty sets indexed by
a nonempty set is nonempty.

Note 5 — Here's the alternate version: Let S be a set. A choice function for S is
a function f from the set of all nonempty subsets of S to S such that f(A) ∈ A for
all A ≠ ∅, A ⊆ S. The Axiom of Choice is equivalent to the claim: Every set S has
a choice function.

Definition 3.0.2. A partially ordered set is a nonempty set A together with a relation R
on A × A (called a partial ordering) of A which is reflexive, transitive and antisymmetric.
Antisymmetry means that if (a, b), (b, a) ∈ R then a = b. For partial ordering R, when
(a, b) ∈ R we denote this as a ≤ b. Elements a, b ∈ A are comparable if either a ≤ b or
b ≤ a. A partial ordering of a set A such that any two elements are comparable is called
a total ordering (or linear or simple ordering).

Example 3.0.3
Let A be the power set of {1, 2, 3, 4, 5} and define C ≤ D if C ⊆ D. This is a partial
ordering, but not a total ordering. For example, {1, 2} and {2, 3} are not comparable.

Let (A, ≤) be a partially ordered set. An element a ∈ A is maximal in A if for every
c ∈ A which is comparable to a, we have c < a. An upper bound of a nonempty subset B
of A is an element d ∈ A such that b ≤ d for every b ∈ B. A nonempty subset B of A
that is totally ordered by ≤ is a chain in A.

Theorem 3.0.4 (Zorn's lemma)
Let A be a nonempty partially ordered set. If every chain has an upper bound, then
A has a local maximum.

Definition 3.0.5. Let B be a nonempty subset of a partially ordered set A (under ≤).
If every nonempty subset of A has a least element, then A is well ordered.

Proposition 3.0.6 (The Well Ordering Principle) If A is a nonempty set, then there
exists a total ordering ≤ of A such that A is well ordered under ≤.

This allows us to extend the Principle of Mathematical Induction (2.0.10) to any well
ordered set.

Similar to the definition of maximum.

---

## 第 2 页

Definition 3.0.7.
• Two sets A and B are equipollent if there exists a bijective map from A to B, in which case we denote this as A~B.
• If set A is equipollent to a set In = {1,2,...,n} for somen ∈ N or to the set Io = ∅ then set A is finite. Otherwise set A is infinite.

Definition 3.0.8. The cardinal number of a set A, denoted |A|, is the equivalence class of A under the equivalence relation of equipollence. |A| is an infinite or finite cardinal according as to whether A is an infinite or finite set.

Let A and B be disjoint sets such that |A| = α and |B| = β. The sum α + β is the cardinal number |A∪B|. The product αβ is the cardinal number |A × B|.

Theorem 3.0.9
If A is a set and P(A) is its power set, then |A| < |P(A)|.

Proof. The assignment a ↦ {a} defines an injective map A → P(A) so that |A| ≤ |P(A)|. If there were a bijective map f : A → P(A), then for some a₀ ∈ A, f(a₀) = B, where B = {a ∈ A | a ∉ f(a)} ⊂ A. But this yields a contradiction: a₀ ∈ B and a₀ ∉ B. Therefore |A| ≠ |P(A)| and hence |A| < |P(A)|.

*Because the mouse is broken, next we'll only list the theorems.

Theorem 3.0.10
If A and B are sets such that |A| ≤ |B| and |B| ≤ |A|, then |A| = |B|.

Theorem 3.0.11
The class of all cardinal numbers is linearly ordered by ≤. If α and β are cardinal numbers, then exactly on of the following is true:
α < β ; α = β ; β < α

Note 6 — This is called the Law of Trichotomy. A family of functions partially ordered as in the proof of 3.0.11 is said to be ordered by extension.

Theorem 3.0.12
Every infinite set has a denumerable subset. In particular, ℵ₀ ≤ α for every infinite cardinal number α.

Lemma 3.0.13
If A is an infinite set and F is a finite set then |A∪F| = |A|. In particular, α+n = α for every infinite cardinal number α and every finite cardinal number n.

---

## 第 3 页

Theorem 3.0.14
If α and β are cardinal numbers such that β ≤ α and α is infinite, then α + β = α.

Theorem 3.0.15
If α and β are cardinal numbers such that 0 ≠ β ≤ α and α is infinite, then αβ = α; in particular, αℵ₀ = α and if B is finite then ℵ₀β = ℵ₀.

Theorem 3.0.16
Let A be a set and for each integer n ≥ 1 let Aⁿ = A × A × ... × A (n factors).
(i) If A is finite, then |Aⁿ| = |A|ⁿ, and if A is infinite then |Aⁿ| = |A|.
(ii) ∪ₙ∈ℕ Aⁿ = ℵ₀|A|

Corollary 3.0.17 If A is an infinite set and F'(A) is the set of all finite subsets of A, then |F(A)| = |A|.

---

